## Stefano Soatto: The Emergence Theory of Deep Learning

### Abstract

Theories of Deep Learning are like anatomical parts best not named explicitly in an abstract: Everyone seems to have one. That is why it is important for a theory to be inclusive: It has to be compatible with all known results, and at the very least explain known empirical phenomena. I will describe the basic elements of the Emergence Theory of Deep Learning, that started as a general theory for representations, and is comprised of three parts: (1) Formalization of desirable properties a representation should possess, based on classical principles of statistical decision and information theory: Sufficiency, Invariance, Minimality, Independence. This has nothing to do with Deep Learning, but is closely tied with the notion of Information Bottleneck and Variational Inference. (2) Description of common empirical losses employed in Deep Learning (e.g., empirical cross-entropy), and implicit or explicit regularization practices, including Dropout, Pooling, as well as recently proven additive entropic components of the loss computed by SGD. Finally, (3) theorems and bounds that show that minimizing suitably (implicitly or explicitly) regularized losses with SGD with respect of the weights implies optimization of the loss described in (1) with respect to the activations of a deep network, and therefore achievement of the desirable properties of the resulting representation formalized in (1). The link between the two is specific to the architecture of deep networks. The theory is related to the Information Bottleneck, but not that described in recent theories, but instead a new Information Bottleneck for the weights of a network, rater than the activation. It is also related to PAC-Bayes, and could be derived with that lens, providing independent validation. It is also related to Kolmogorov complexity. It is also related to “flat minima”, in the sense that the crucial regularizing quantity - the information in the weights - bounds the nuclear norm of the Hessian around critical points. It also shows that there is no need to rethink regularization, and that - unlike the Hessian - information is invariant to reparametrization.

### Bio

Stefano Soatto is Professor of Computer Science and Electrical Engineering, and Director of the UCLA Vision Lab, in the Henry Samueli School of Engineering and Applied Sciences at UCLA. He is also Director of Applied Science at Amazon AI - AWS. He received his Ph.D. in Control and Dynamical Systems from the California Institute of Technology in 1996; he joined UCLA in 2000 after being Assistant and then Associate Professor of Electrical and Biomedical Engineering at Washington University, and Research Associate in Applied Sciences at Harvard University. Between 1995 and 1998 he was also Ricercatore in the Department of Mathematics and Computer Science at the University of Udine - Italy. He received his D.Ing. degree (highest honors) from the University of Padova- Italy in 1992. Dr. Soatto is the recipient of the David Marr Prize for work on Euclidean reconstruction and reprojection up to subgroups. He also received the Siemens Prize with the Outstanding Paper Award from the IEEE Computer Society for his work on optimal structure from motion. He received the National Science Foundation Career Award and the Okawa Foundation Grant. He was Associate Editor of the IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence (PAMI) and a Member of the Editorial Board of the International Journal of Computer Vision (IJCV) and Foundations and Trends in Computer Graphics and Vision, Journal of Mathematical Imaging and Vision, SIAM Imaging. He is a Fellow of the IEEE.
